Design: LogQL Fields (#1848)
grafana/loki: docs/design-documents/2020-03-logql-fields.md

# LogQL Fields

- Author: Cyril Tovena (@cyriltovena)
- Date: Mar 18 2020
- Status: DRAFT

This design document is an extension of [the first design document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BrxnzqEfZnVVYUnjpZR-b9i5w9FNWRzzhyOq5ftCc-Q/edit#heading=h.2obxic2dx0xn) for extracting and analyzing data from logs using Loki's LogQL.

Based on the feedback of the first design and our own usage, it’s pretty clear that we want to support extracting fields out of the log line for detailed analysis. [Amazon Cloud Watch is a good example](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonCloudWatch/latest/logs/CWL_QuerySyntax-examples.html) of such language features.

For instance some users are currently extracting labels using Promtail pipeline stages as a way to filter and aggregate logs but this causes issues with our storage system. (Causes the creation of a lot of small chunks, putting pressure on the filesystem when trying to aggregated over a long period of time).

> In this proposal I want to introduce multiple new operators into the LogQL language, that will allow to transform a log stream into a field stream which can be then aggregated, compared, sorted and outputted by our users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this proposal I introduce multiple new operators in the LogQL language that will allow transforming a log stream into a field stream which can be then aggregated, compared, and sorted.
```

```json
{
  "stream": {
   "job": "loki-dev/ingester",
   "cluster": "us-central1",
   "namespace" : "loki-dev",
  },
  "values": [
    [
      "1584114643856675277",
      {
          "level":"info",
          "ts": "2020-03-13T15:50:43.856555",
          "caller": "metrics.go"
      }
    ],
   [
      "1584114643856675278",
      {
          "level":"warn",
          "ts": "2020-03-13T15:50:43.856556",
          "caller": "metrics.go"
      }
    ]
  ]
}
```

Field names are declared by each parsers, some parser will allow implicit fields extraction for __brevity__ like the `json` and `logfmt` parsers.

Since field name can conflicts with labels during aggregation we will support for each parser the ability to rename a field. However in case of conflict fields will take precedence over labels.

> Implicit fields extraction could means trouble in term of performance. However in most cases we will be able to infer all used fields from the full query and so limit the extraction per line.

To cover a wide range of structured and unstructured logs, we will start with those four parsers: `glob`, `logfmt`, `json` and `regexp`.

### Glob

> The glob parser (as described in previous design) `{job="prod/nginx"} | glob "*<client_ip> - - [ * ] \"* *<path> "` could be used to extract fields from nginx logs.

Reviewer 2: should glob be able to call other parsers? it's not too uncommon in other tools that something like this is available to treat the case of some custom header followed by structured information

Author: Yes it is, this is inspired by aws. It will be much faster and much easier to use than regexp. Regexp will be the last resort if you can't parse your logs with the rest.

Regexp matching will be very slow.

Author: > should glob be able to call other parsers?

I see the use case not sure if there is a nice way to incorporate this in the current syntax. Definitely not part of the MVP but yeah I would like to leave the door open. If you have some suggestions let me know.

May be we have to draw a line with what we support, this seems to say we will support multiple format in a single log line. Do you have an log example ?

Promtail is able to do multiple parsing for extracted fields.  But the syntax is yaml and we are less worried about the performance there.

> The glob parser (as described in previous design) `{job="prod/nginx"} | glob "*<client_ip> - - [ * ] \"* *<path> "` could be used to extract fields from nginx logs.

Author: Yes it will be a special glob, I used glob as it's the closest language but you're right it's not exactly that.

See aws example:

```
FIELDS @message
| PARSE @message "* [*] *" as loggingTime, loggingType, loggingMessage
| FILTER loggingType IN ["ERROR", "INFO"]
| DISPLAY loggingMessage, loggingType = "ERROR" as isError
```

```

would be transformed into those fields:

```json
{
    "client_ip": "127.0.0.1",
    "path": "/GO.jpg"
}
```

This parser use [glob pattern matching](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glob_(programming)) and extract named matches(*\<name>) into fields.
If the line doesn't match the glob it will be filtered out.

### Json

The json parser allows to parse a json log line and select fields to extract. If the line is not a valid json document the line will be skipped.

We could support those notations:

```logql
{job="prod/app"} | json .route client_ip=.client.ip
{job="prod/app"} | json .route .client.ip as route, client_ip
{job="prod/app"} | json |select route client_ip
{job="prod/app"} | json
```

> `{job="prod/app"} |json |select route client_ip` is an implicit extraction, the list of extracted field is inferred from the full query.

The log line :

```log
{
    "route": "/api/v1/foo",
    "client": {
        "ip": "127.0.0.1",
        "org-id": "grafana-labs"
    }
}
```

would be transformed into those fields:

```json
{
    "client_ip": "127.0.0.1",
    "route": "/api/v1/foo"
}
```

### Logfmt

> The logfmt parser will allow to extract fields from the [log format](https://brandur.org/logfmt). For example the expression `{job="prod/app"} | logfmt client_ip path` will transform the log line `time=03-10-2020T20:00:01 path=/foo/bar client_ip="127.0.0.1"` into :

Reviewer 2: I'd break this down into multiple lines for readability.

```json
{
    "client_ip": "127.0.0.1",
    "path": "/foo/bar"
}
```

Again it might be useful to allow renaming fields to avoid conflicts with labels.

For instance `{job="prod/app"} | logfmt ip=client_ip path` will rename the field `client_ip` into `ip`.

`logfmt` will also support implicit field extraction like `json`.

### Regexp

At last, the regexp operator should cover all other use cases but is probably the less efficient and intuitive.

> While we already support `|~` and `!~` filters, we don't want to mix parsers and filters since their purpose are different, filters should be used to narrow the log volume and reduce the number of lines to parse. This is why we will use the notation `| regexp` for the parser operator.

For example the expression `{job="prod/app"} | regexp "(?<client_ip>.+) - - (?<path>.+)"` will transform the log line `127.0.0.1 - - /foo/bar` into :

```json
{
    "client_ip": "127.0.0.1",
    "path": "/foo/bar"
}
```

### Questions

- Should we allow to implicit field extraction such as `{job="prod/app"} | logfmt` and `{job="prod/app"} | json` would extract all fields ? I really like the simplicity of it.

> - In the previous document the `as field_name1, field_name2` field renaming notation was also interesting should we use is over `ip=client_ip` for now I've opted for the later which can be omitted in case of no renaming ?

Reviewer 3: Can I combine implicit all and renaming? Or would `| json ip=client_ip` only return that single field?

Author: Good question ! No as soon as you add a rename only explicit fields are extracted. I would love to have an option to keep every fields while renaming one but there’s two issues:

- We need a meaningful syntax for this.
- By default we should not be greedy, at least IMO.

How do you think we can solve that ? Select suffers from the same issue.

> - Do we prefer `|json` or `| json` notation ?

Reviewer 3: Shell formatters tend to put spacing here .. which is IMHO visually preferable

```

returns the first 25 query and duration slower than 10s ordered by the slowest in the requested time range.

Let's have a look in details how those new operators work.

### Filter

A filter operation noted `| filter` can filter out fields by their value using test predicates such as `path = "/foo/bar"`.

Multiple test predicates can be chained/combined together using `and` and `or` logic operations.

At least one leg of the test predicate must be a literal, this is to ensure we can infer the type to use for comparison. We could later add support for cross field comparison.

__String literal__ will support the same Prometheus match type. (`=`,`=!`,`!~`,`=~`).

Example: `{job="prod/query-frontend"} | logfmt | filter level=~"info|debug" and query_type!="filter"`

__Numeric literal__ will support `=`,`!=` but also `<`,`<=`,`>`,`>=`.

Example: `{job="prod/query-frontend"} | json | filter latency > 10 or status >= 400`

When field value and literal types are different, conversion will be attempted prior testing and will be translated into zero type values in case of failure.

In the future we will add more literals such as durations `2s` and dates (`03-03-2020T20:30`).

### Sort

> The sort operation noted `| sort` allows to orders fields entries by a field value instead of the field entry time.

Author: So I'm pretty I've tried to explain that but it won't sort the whole time range. It will sort only the resulting logs/fields once filtered.

You get the first x sorted.

> The sort operation noted `| sort` allows to orders fields entries by a field value instead of the field entry time.

Author: This is mostly for your eyes, once you received the result, show me the slowest first.

> It should be noted that sorting is always executed after parsing fields entries in the time range. Not on the whole time range.

For example: `{job="prod/query-frontend"} | json | sort latency desc`

will sort  the first 1000 (default limit) fields entries by the highest latency first. Multiple fields can be used as fallback by the sort operation in case of equality.

For example: `{job="prod/query-frontend"} | json | sort latency desc path asc` will sort by latency descending first then path ascending.

Using sort operator with metric queries will result into an error.(e.g `count_over_time({job="prod/query-frontend"} | logfmt  | sort latency desc [5m])`)

> > __Warning:__ Sorting is dependent on how Grafana is currently ordering lines. Even if we re order our responses there is no guarantee that Grafana will be relying on it. And we might have to remove uncommon labels to keep only stream to ensure ordering across field streams. This means we will need a new API (`/v2`) to support ordering, although with compromise we might get something to work with the `v1` API.

Author: @davkal What do you think about this ?

Reviewer: I think some feedback would be helpful here. How do other plugins (if any) implement upstream-defined sorting?

Author: Cloudwatch does support this I think, @kaydelaney ? This is a big document sorry ;)

```

because the field extraction was explicit, only those fields (`query` and `duration`) are outputted.

This is why select is important to use for large queries. Select will allows users to remove data (column) in their logs that are useless, repetitive and not interesting for the current investigation.

The select operation will also support the [go templating language](https://golang.org/pkg/text/template/) when supplied with string argument and not fields.

Fields extracted will be available under the `.FieldName` and `$FieldName` notation in the template.

This way users can format each field to be more digestible. Returning a payload size  field with value of `12321421230123` is less meaningful than `12TB`.

Example:

```logql
{job="prod/query-frontend"} | logfmt | select payload_size="{{ .size | humanize }}" level="{{ $level | ToUpper}}"
```

Renaming is allowed with or without templates, and is optional. An autogenerated field name will be used if it can't be inferred. (`field1`,`field2`, etc...)

__In this current stance, select is not greedy meaning if you want to rename or template a single field, you'll have to declare all other fields to keep them.__

> In the future we might consider a `without` operator to take all fields but those passed as parameter. (`{job="prod/query-frontend"} | logfmt | without msg`)

Reviewer 3: I think `exclude` would fit better here, because it's more of an opposite to select

Author: I feel like this is related to the problem you found with renaming implicit extract. I do like exclude, will change.

### Limit

The limit operator (`| limit x`) is a new operator to overwrite the query string limit, this can be handy for building dashboard with different limits but also when writing and testing queries, you could start to experiment with a low limit to increase the feedback loop.

If the limit operator is missing in the expression, the limit from the query string is used.

The limit operator can be applied to a log field  as well as a log stream.

For example all of the above are corrects.

```logql
{job="prod/query-frontend"} | logfmt query duration | sort duration desc | limit 25
{job="prod/query-frontend"} | limit 10
{job="prod/query-frontend"} |= "foo" | limit 20
```

Using limit operator with metric queries will result into an error. (e.g `rate({job="prod/query-frontend"} | limit 10[5m])`)

### Uniq

> The uniq operator allows to filter out duplicates. Without any parameter (`| uniq`) each fields combination must be unique from one entry to another. However

Author: >This can only be implemented efficiently if data going to uniq filter is already sorted. (Command line uniq tool only compares adjacent lines as well)

Again this will basically returns line and filter the one you already have, it won't deduplicates the whole time range. I'm not sure I understand your concern @pstibrany.

> BTW, can we just CLI tool instead or LogQL features?

Of course it could but what's interesting server side is that any new language feature will be supported by logcli and Grafana and any other tool, I don't expect everyone to use CLI tooling. 

However for CLI I have other plan, currently we don't support streaming logs and this is a great use case for CLI as you could pipe and stream to other tools.

> The uniq operator allows to filter out duplicates. Without any parameter (`| uniq`) each fields combination must be unique from one entry to another. However

Reviewer 4: > Again this will basically returns line and filter the one you already have, it won't deduplicates the whole time range. I'm not sure I understand your concern @pstibrany.

I think I'm missing understanding in the distinction you're making about time ranges. My concern is that to do general deduplication you need to remember all previous values. But it seems that is not an issue here?

> The uniq operator allows to filter out duplicates. Without any parameter (`| uniq`) each fields combination must be unique from one entry to another. However

Author: Loki is scanning from the start or the end. Uniq operator will just ensure that the first 1000 lines returned are unique, so it will keep scanning until we have that. It won't dedupe from start to end all lines and then return the first 1000 lines.

> The uniq operator allows to filter out duplicates. Without any parameter (`| uniq`) each fields combination must be unique from one entry to another. However

Reviewer 4: I often use logcli with much higher limits than 1000 ;-)

> The uniq operator allows to filter out duplicates. Without any parameter (`| uniq`) each fields combination must be unique from one entry to another. However

Author: Probably because you have duplicates :). I think we do have improvement to make to the logcli to stream logs and so enable all nice unix tool, but that's another story.

> `quantile_over_time(scalar, range-vector)` only works if you have a series with the labels(`le`) this is why you need to use `| histogram` operator on the field stream.

Now let's pretend we have received temperatures from censors around the house into Loki like this:

```log
2020-03-20T10:20:30 LivingRoom 20C
2020-03-20T10:21:00 Kitchen 21C
2020-03-20T10:21:15 Kid1 19C
....
```

To get the average temperatures by room in the last 30 minutes we could use the query below:

```logql
avg_over_time({job="censors"} | glob "* *<room> *<temp>C" | series temp by (room) [30m])
```

As another example if we have some nginx logs like below:

```log
127.0.0.1 - - [19/Jun/2012:09:16:22 +0100] "GET /GO.jpg HTTP/1.1" 499 100 "-" "-"
127.0.0.1 - - [19/Jun/2012:09:16:22 +0100] "GET /test.jpg HTTP/1.1" 200 99 "-" "-"
```

We could get the 99th percentile latency by path and status over the last 15 minutes using the query below:

```logql
quantile_over_time(.99, {job="nginx"} | glob "* -- * \"* /*<path> *\" *<status> *<latency> *" | histogram latency linear(.25, 2, 5) by (path, status) [15m])
```

> ## API Changes

Author: @davkal Do you think this is a good approach ? I really wanted to make sure most people even if they don't update can have this new syntax supported.

Reviewer: I'd also like some thoughts from 
@davkal on this.

# LogQL Fields

- Author: Cyril Tovena (@cyriltovena)
- Date: Mar 18 2020
- Status: DRAFT

This design document is an extension of [the first design document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BrxnzqEfZnVVYUnjpZR-b9i5w9FNWRzzhyOq5ftCc-Q/edit#heading=h.2obxic2dx0xn) for extracting and analyzing data from logs using Loki's LogQL.

Based on the feedback of the first design and our own usage, it’s pretty clear that we want to support extracting fields out of the log line for detailed analysis. [Amazon Cloud Watch is a good example](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonCloudWatch/latest/logs/CWL_QuerySyntax-examples.html) of such language features.

For instance some users are currently extracting labels using Promtail pipeline stages as a way to filter and aggregate logs but this causes issues with our storage system. (Causes the creation of a lot of small chunks, putting pressure on the filesystem when trying to aggregated over a long period of time).

In this proposal I introduce multiple new operators in the LogQL language that will allow transforming a log stream into a field stream which can be then aggregated, compared, and sorted.

> You'll see that all those new operators (except aggregations over time) are chain together with the `|` pipe operator. This is because we believe it's the most intuitive way to write queries that process data in the Linux world as opposed to the function format. (e.g `cat my.log | grep -e 'foo' | jq .field | wc -l` is easier to read than `wc(jq(grep(cat my.log,'foo'),.field),-l)`)

Reviewer 5: 💯 agree.

To cover a wide range of structured and unstructured logs, we will start with those four parsers: `glob`, `logfmt`, `json` and `regexp`.

### Glob

The glob parser (as described in previous design) `{job="prod/nginx"} | glob "*<client_ip> - - [ * ] \"* *<path> "` could be used to extract fields from nginx logs.

The log entry below:

```log
127.0.0.1 - - [19/Jun/2012:09:16:22 +0100] "GET /GO.jpg HTTP/1.1" 499 0 "http://domain.com/htm_data/7/1206/758536.html" "Mozilla/4.0 (compatible; MSIE 7.0; Windows NT 5.1; Trident/4.0; .NET CLR 1.1.4322; .NET CLR 2.0.50727; .NET CLR 3.0.4506.2152; .NET CLR 3.5.30729; SE 2.X MetaSr 1.0)"
```

would be transformed into those fields:

```json
{
    "client_ip": "127.0.0.1",
    "path": "/GO.jpg"
}
```

This parser use [glob pattern matching](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glob_(programming)) and extract named matches(*\<name>) into fields.
If the line doesn't match the glob it will be filtered out.

### Json

The json parser allows to parse a json log line and select fields to extract. If the line is not a valid json document the line will be skipped.

We could support those notations:

```logql
{job="prod/app"} | json .route client_ip=.client.ip

> {job="prod/app"} | json .route .client.ip as route, client_ip

Reviewer: It may be less beneficial to expose both `=` and `as` for assigning keys to values. Unless I'm missing something, I think it'd be better to choose one.

Author: Yeah I'm asking for feedback which one is better ?

Also do you prefer ` | json .route, .client` or `|json .route .client` ?

Reviewer: `| json`

{job="prod/app"} | json |select route client_ip
{job="prod/app"} | json
```

> > `{job="prod/app"} |json |select route client_ip` is an implicit extraction, the list of extracted field is inferred from the full query.

Reviewer: If we're inferring the required field, can we remove explicit extraction?

Author: At query time yes that's the plan.

```logql
{job="prod/app"} | logfmt client_ip path
```

will transform the log line

```log
time=03-10-2020T20:00:01 path=/foo/bar client_ip="127.0.0.1"
```

into those fields:

```json
{
    "client_ip": "127.0.0.1",
    "path": "/foo/bar"
}
```

Again it might be useful to allow renaming fields to avoid conflicts with labels.

For instance `{job="prod/app"} | logfmt ip=client_ip path` will rename the field `client_ip` into `ip`.

`logfmt` will also support implicit field extraction like `json`.

### Regexp

At last, the regexp operator should cover all other use cases but is probably the less efficient and intuitive.

> While we already support `|~` and `!~` filters, we don't want to mix parsers and filters since their purpose are different, filters should be used to narrow the log volume and reduce the number of lines to parse. This is why we will use the notation `| regexp` for the parser operator.

For example the expression `{job="prod/app"} | regexp "(?<client_ip>.+) - - (?<path>.+)"` will transform the log line `127.0.0.1 - - /foo/bar` into :

```json
{
    "client_ip": "127.0.0.1",
    "path": "/foo/bar"
}
```

### Questions

> - Should we allow to implicit field extraction such as `{job="prod/app"} | logfmt` and `{job="prod/app"} | json` would extract all fields ? I really like the simplicity of it.

Reviewer 5: Definitely yes.

> - In the previous document the `as field_name1, field_name2` field renaming notation was also interesting should we use is over `ip=client_ip` for now I've opted for the later which can be omitted in case of no renaming ?

Reviewer 5: The new `ip=client_ip` notation looks more natural to me.

> - In the previous document the `as field_name1, field_name2` field renaming notation was also interesting should we use is over `ip=client_ip` for now I've opted for the later which can be omitted in case of no renaming ?

Reviewer: I'd prefer `<ip=>client_ip` because as an operator it's easier to change queries. Using `as` syntax requires that we also keep track of the _index_ of the matches as well as requiring explicitly naming the field. `a, b as _, other_b` could be used to minimize this, but I still prefer the `=` syntax -- I can easily add a new key value pair in the middle of my selections without causing off-by-one issues in keying the selected values.

Author: Good point however = or => ?

> - Do we prefer `|json` or `| json` notation ?

Reviewer 5: Why should we choose one? Can't both be supported? If not, I would pick `| json` because `|something` is currently used for the filter expression (ie. `|=`) while here we're defining subsequent processing stages.

Author: Yep we can I thin that's would be likely.

> ## LogQL Fields Operators

Reviewer 5: What if I specify a label as a field in a operator? Would that work? I assume yes, but I haven't found a clear statement about it (or I missed it).

Author: I wasn't planning but that could be stretched.

Reviewer 5: Whatever will be the final decision I believe this should be clearly documented, cause it could be a frequent doubt.

Now that we have transformed our log streams into log fields we can pipe/chain a new set of operators.
(Some operators are also compatible with log stream such as the `limit` and `uniq` operators.)

For example the query below:

```logql
{job="prod/query-frontend"} | logfmt | filter level="info" and latency > 10 | sort duration desc | limit 25 | select query duration
```

returns the first 25 query and duration slower than 10s ordered by the slowest in the requested time range.

Let's have a look in details how those new operators work.

> ### Filter

Reviewer 5: Does it support parenthesis to group logical operators (ie. `(a = 1 and b = 2) or (c = 3)`)?

Author: I wasn't planning to add that as part of the MVP but if it's not too hard we would support it. Pretty sure this is something @owen-d can knock very quickly.

A filter operation noted `| filter` can filter out fields by their value using test predicates such as `path = "/foo/bar"`.

Multiple test predicates can be chained/combined together using `and` and `or` logic operations.

At least one leg of the test predicate must be a literal, this is to ensure we can infer the type to use for comparison. We could later add support for cross field comparison.

__String literal__ will support the same Prometheus match type. (`=`,`=!`,`!~`,`=~`).

Example: `{job="prod/query-frontend"} | logfmt | filter level=~"info|debug" and query_type!="filter"`

> __Numeric literal__ will support `=`,`!=` but also `<`,`<=`,`>`,`>=`.

Reviewer 5: How is a numeric field detected? Which numeric notations/formats are supported?

Author: We want to support float and integer but we should definitively support some scientific notation. This will be part of the implementation details. Thanks for raising this !

Example: `{job="prod/query-frontend"} | json | filter latency > 10 or status >= 400`

> When field value and literal types are different, conversion will be attempted prior testing and will be translated into zero type values in case of failure.

Reviewer: I'm hesitant about this - I think failing in the case of invalid conversions would be a more intuitive/safer way to go. If needed, we could support a way to use a default value if parsing is unsuccessful

Author: Yes but then I realized what if only one log doesn't have the value in the correct format ? erroring seems harsh.

Reviewer: can we remove it from the sample set instead?

Author: We could yes ! Noted.

> In the future we will add more literals such as durations `2s` and dates (`03-03-2020T20:30`).

Reviewer 5: Would be possible to add duration at this stage? I think parsing durations may be one of the most common use cases (at least would be to me).

### Sort

The sort operation noted `| sort` allows to orders fields entries by a field value instead of the field entry time.

> It should be noted that sorting is always executed after parsing fields entries in the time range. Not on the whole time range.

For example: `{job="prod/query-frontend"} | json | sort latency desc`

> will sort  the first 1000 (default limit) fields entries by the highest latency first. Multiple fields can be used as fallback by the sort operation in case of equality.

Reviewer 5: What do you mean here? As a final user, I would expect that we sort all entries (unlimited) and then return the first 1000 (default limit) or the `| limit X` specified.

Author: A stream selector is always limited and the sorting will happens after, on the set of entries (1000 by default as we know it)

I thought about ordering the whole time range, I was scared about implementation details and efficiency depending on how much logs there is to search for.

I thought this would be sufficient, but I understand that this can be confusing.

I don't think sorting will be the first one to be implemented so we will need to take that feedback in when we do.

> For example: `{job="prod/query-frontend"} | json | sort latency desc path asc` will sort by latency descending first then path ascending.

Reviewer 5: Have you considered introducing a separator between fields (ie. `sort latency desc, path asc`)?

Author: Now I do !

> Using sort operator with metric queries will result into an error.(e.g `count_over_time({job="prod/query-frontend"} | logfmt  | sort latency desc [5m])`)

Reviewer 5: I personally find the ending `[5m]` very confusing. This is an extension of the current syntax (ie. `count_over_time({job="prod/query-frontend"} != "something"[5m])`) which is already confusing, but further complicated by the chain of pipes.

_It's not specific to the sort operator but the syntax in general._

Author: We support this too:

```
count_over_time({job="prod/query-frontend"} [5m] != "something"))
```

And this will also be same for this document. The range `[5m]` can be at the beginning or the end. I recently realized that at the beginning was more natural for most people.

Reviewer 5: Very interesting! I wasn't aware of that. Is this documented? I probably missed it.

Author: I don't think we have it documented 😢 but I'll add this now !

> __Warning:__ Sorting is dependent on how Grafana is currently ordering lines. Even if we re order our responses there is no guarantee that Grafana will be relying on it. And we might have to remove uncommon labels to keep only stream to ensure ordering across field streams. This means we will need a new API (`/v2`) to support ordering, although with compromise we might get something to work with the `v1` API.

### Select

> The Select operator (`| select`) allows you to select and reduce field that should be returned.

Reviewer: I think that we should _only_ use inferred selections if possible. The go templating use case is independent AFAICT and we could use a `gotpl` option to do this sort of mapping I think. Thoughts @cyriltovena?

Author: Yep we might be able to infer all the time. I need to verify this.

And may be a template operator is better, specially if we can just chain them but that doesn't improve brevity.

If you don't provide a select operator, all fields parsed will be returned by default. This means all fields from a log line if you're using implicit extraction. However if you used explicit extraction, only those fields will be returned.

For example this query:

```logql
{job="prod/query-frontend"} | logfmt | sort duration desc | limit 25 | select query duration
```

is the same as this one

```logql
{job="prod/query-frontend"} | logfmt query duration | sort duration desc | limit 25
```

because the field extraction was explicit, only those fields (`query` and `duration`) are outputted.

This is why select is important to use for large queries. Select will allows users to remove data (column) in their logs that are useless, repetitive and not interesting for the current investigation.

> The select operation will also support the [go templating language](https://golang.org/pkg/text/template/) when supplied with string argument and not fields.

Reviewer 6: A little concerned about exposing all of this functionality.  It's a large surface area for both security and performance issues.

Author: Fair point.

I expect this to come at a later stage and I think we should be careful.

Reviewer 5: To me, the select operator looks the wrong operator to add templating support. I would expect the select operator to just select fields and not transform them. I'm personally dubious about supporting the go templating language at all in any operator but if so I would suggest to use a dedicated operator.

Author: Good feedback !

I hesitate on this. I think we want to allow re-formatting in case the data is not visually helpful or meaningful.

Based on @owen-d feedback, I'm wondering if `select` is really need and if we just don't want a formatter operator.

The uses cases was to reduce noise from logs that are redundant, basically covering pipeparse use case from @slim-bean

Fields extracted will be available under the `.FieldName` and `$FieldName` notation in the template.

This way users can format each field to be more digestible. Returning a payload size  field with value of `12321421230123` is less meaningful than `12TB`.

Example:

```logql
{job="prod/query-frontend"} | logfmt | select payload_size="{{ .size | humanize }}" level="{{ $level | ToUpper}}"
```

Renaming is allowed with or without templates, and is optional. An autogenerated field name will be used if it can't be inferred. (`field1`,`field2`, etc...)

__In this current stance, select is not greedy meaning if you want to rename or template a single field, you'll have to declare all other fields to keep them.__

In the future we might consider a `exclude` operator to take all fields but those passed as parameter. (`{job="prod/query-frontend"} | logfmt | exclude msg`)

### Limit

The limit operator (`| limit x`) is a new operator to overwrite the query string limit, this can be handy for building dashboard with different limits but also when writing and testing queries, you could start to experiment with a low limit to increase the feedback loop.

> If the limit operator is missing in the expression, the limit from the query string is used.

Reviewer 6: I could see some confusion about the interaction of these two parameters.  Without looking at the code I wouldn't know when one or the other is applied.

Author: This is why the operator always takes precedence. I'll make sure this is well documented.

The limit operator can be applied to a log field  as well as a log stream.

> For example all of the above are corrects.

Reviewer 6: nit:  `correct`

```logql
{job="prod/query-frontend"} | logfmt query duration | sort duration desc | limit 25
{job="prod/query-frontend"} | limit 10
{job="prod/query-frontend"} |= "foo" | limit 20
```

Using limit operator with metric queries will result into an error. (e.g `rate({job="prod/query-frontend"} | limit 10[5m])`)

> ### Uniq

Reviewer 5: What's the use case for this? You mentioned "This is really useful to reduce noise applications might generate by failing constantly" but I would consider more useful the filter expression `!= "noise log"` unless the `uniq` remove duplicates only when they're consecutive (I think this is unclear from the proposal).

Author: It doesn't remove only consecutive simply all duplicates lines.

The use case is exactly what you describe with the `!= "noise log"`, the problem I've seen with this solution with my own experience is that you endup writing this:

`{app="noisy"} != "not that one" != "nope nope" != "still not" != "and no"`

Reviewer 7: Other uses cases I've had for `uniq` in the past are something like this `cat log.txt | cut -d " " -f 2 | sort | uniq` where I have a lot like:
```
2020-03-20Z00:00:00 slim-bean bunch of other stuff...
```
Something similar to what you might see in an apache access log where I wanted to get a list of unique users in the logs.

Similarly i've done this with IP addresses, etc

The uniq operator allows to filter out duplicates. Without any parameter (`| uniq`) each fields combination must be unique from one entry to another. However

> the filtering can be forced on a specific field, for example `| uniq status_code`, this will returns one entry per status code.

Reviewer 5: How do you decide which entry to keep if the matching is done only on a subset of the log entry (ie. a single field)?

Author: It means it will keep an entry only if the field has not been seen before. This would allows you to get the list of unique address IP as explained by @slim-bean . `{app="nginx"} | glob ... | uniq address_ip`

I did a poor job at explaining all those uses cases. Gonna do another run to explain that for each operators.

While `count_over_time` and `rate` count entries occurrence per log & field stream, now that we can select fields we will allow some new aggregation functions over those field values.

#### Series & Histogram Operators

To transform fields into series we will introduce two new field stream operators `| series` and `| histogram`. In the future we could introduce other operators like `| counter <field> [inc|dec] by (<label>,<field>)` to sum values if needed.

The series operator `| series <field> by (<label>,<field>)` creates a series from a field stream, the first parameter is the field to use as value, this means each field entry (field/timestamp pair) will create a point (value/timestamp pair). You can then use `by` or `without` to group series metric (again you can include labels or field or both) prior aggregations. You can also omit the grouping clause in which case all extracted fields and labels will define the set of series returned.

Example of a series transformation:

```logql
{job="app"} | json | series latency by (path, status)
{job="app"} | json | series latency
{job="app"} | json | series latency without (instance)
```

> The histogram operator `| histogram <field> [<array_of_float>] by (<label>,<field>)` creates a [Prometheus histogram](https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#histogram) with the given `<array_of_float>` buckets. It will compute cumulative counters for the observation buckets as well as a counter of all observed values and the total sum of all observations. Series count per query will also be limited, so trying to use too many buckets will result in an error.

Reviewer 5: Have you considered `histogram <field> buckets(<array_of_float>) by (<label>,<field>)`? Even if a bit more verbose, I think it would fit better along with `exp(20000, 2, 10)` and `linear(.75, 2, 10)`.

Author: I like the consistency of it. I'll make the change.

One of the biggest benefits will be that user won't need to index log content anymore for the only purpose of filtering or creating metrics.

For example giving the nginx log below:

```log
- 34.253.246.66 - [34.253.246.66] - something.grafana.net - - [01/Apr/2020:15:44:36 +0000] "POST /metrics HTTP/1.1" 200 49 "-" "Go-http-client/1.1" 561 0.050 [something] 10.40.60.217:80 49 0.050 200 be9c1555b014bcf80e8f2550fcaf7d51
```

We would like to answer those questions :

- What's the p99 latency over time for the path `/metrics` ?
- What's the request rate per path and status ?
- What's the average latency over time for a given IP address ?

Now since we need to parse log content another set of ad-hoc analysis use cases could also be covered:

- Show me the logs of requests slower than 5s for a given domain.
- Show me the log with only IP address, latency and path. (Remove redundant noise within logs)
- I have many redundant logs, show me only unique subset of them.
- Sort log result by latency.
- Show me all first x unique IP within a time range.
- Reformat a log line to be more readable.

> However those use cases are out of scope:

Reviewer 8: The following use cases are kept out of scope:

> - What's the latency xth quantile over a year, we don't expect time range to be higher than couple of day max.

Reviewer 9: 1-2 months feels like in many cases a _lot_ of data. I don't think it's unreasonable though to allow such a query, with the expectation that it might take minutes or more to complete. Additionally, if someone had multiple Loki installations, they could spin up, and run a large cluster for a short amount of time to perform such operations (like how Elastic Map Reduce jobs work)

> - What's the latency xth quantile over a year, we don't expect time range to be higher than couple of day max.

Author: Exactly !

    ]
  ]
}
```

As you can see the log is using the popular logfmt so we could use the `| logfmt` parsers to transform those entries into the fields entries like below:

```json
{
  "stream": {
   "job": "loki-dev/ingester",
   "cluster": "us-central1",
   "namespace" : "loki-dev",
  },
  "values": [
    [
      "1584114643856675277",
      {
          "level":"info",
          "ts": "2020-03-13T15:50:43.856555",
          "caller": "metrics.go"
      }
    ],
   [
      "1584114643856675278",
      {
          "level":"warn",
          "ts": "2020-03-13T15:50:43.856556",
          "caller": "metrics.go"
      }
    ]
  ]
}
```

Field names are declared by each parsers, some parser will allow implicit fields extraction for __brevity__ like the `json` and `logfmt` parsers.

Since field name can conflicts with labels during aggregation we will support for each parser the ability to rename a field. However in case of conflict fields will take precedence over labels.

> Implicit fields extraction could means trouble in term of performance. However in most cases we will be able to infer all used fields from the full query and so limit the extraction per line.

> To cover a wide range of structured and unstructured logs, we will start with those four parsers: `glob`, `logfmt`, `json` and `regexp`.

Reviewer 8: what about Grok expressions?

### Glob

The glob parser (as described in previous design) `{job="prod/nginx"} | glob "*<client_ip> - - [ * ] \"* *<path> "` could be used to extract fields from nginx logs.

The log entry below:

```log
127.0.0.1 - - [19/Jun/2012:09:16:22 +0100] "GET /GO.jpg HTTP/1.1" 499 0 "http://domain.com/htm_data/7/1206/758536.html" "Mozilla/4.0 (compatible; MSIE 7.0; Windows NT 5.1; Trident/4.0; .NET CLR 1.1.4322; .NET CLR 2.0.50727; .NET CLR 3.0.4506.2152; .NET CLR 3.5.30729; SE 2.X MetaSr 1.0)"
```

> would be transformed into those fields:

Reviewer 10: Are field key/value pairs only strings? Obviously keys are strings, but can values be something else, e.g. arrays?

We are doing similar to Canonical Log Lines ([ref 1](https://brandur.org/canonical-log-lines), [ref 2](https://stripe.com/blog/canonical-log-lines)), but with all messages for a request nested under a `messages` key, in an array.  So basically every http request is one log line.

It looks like this:

```json
{
  "request-id" : "2d94738b-0324-a1fc-2916-644716f3ea36",
  "ip-address" : "127.0.0.1",
  "user-name" : "Jane Doe",
  "http-method" : "get",
  "http-response" : "200",
  "duration" : 125,
  "service" : "authentication",
  "messages" : [
    "Attempted to authenticate user Jane",
    "Connecting to internal IAM system",
    "Internal IAM system responded with unknown user id",
    "Provided user id is unknown, cannot verify user, returning response to user",
    "…",
    "Requested completed"
  ]
}
```

There are two fields here that aren't strings, `duration` (an integer) and `messages` (an array). 

Would be great if LogQL would support querying against array fields like this.

@cyriltovena let me know what you think!

Author: I haven't thought about the full json syntax yet.

```json
{
    "client_ip": "127.0.0.1",
    "path": "/GO.jpg"
}
```

This parser use [glob pattern matching](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glob_(programming)) and extract named matches(*\<name>) into fields.
If the line doesn't match the glob it will be filtered out.

### Json

The json parser allows to parse a json log line and select fields to extract. If the line is not a valid json document the line will be skipped.

> We could support those notations:

Author: Yes totally agree, probably a subset, cause jq does not have a go library (at least without cgo) and that would be too hard to support it all.

> We could support those notations:

Reviewer 10: 👍 Subset is totally fine and probably a better idea than supporting everything.

> We could support those notations:

Reviewer 11: > Yes totally agree, probably a subset, cause jq does not have a go library (at least without cgo) and that would be too hard to support it all.

https://github.com/itchyny/gojq

If you wanted to use cgo bindings: https://github.com/jzelinskie/faq/tree/master/pkg/jq but I wouldn't recommend it. It's a huge pain to work with and you'll have a bunch of security issues I'd bet.

Idk how good gojq is though.

```logql
{job="prod/app"} | json .route client_ip=.client.ip
{job="prod/app"} | json .route .client.ip as route, client_ip

> {job="prod/app"} | json |select route client_ip

Reviewer 12: It's not obvious why I use `.route` but `|select`. Together with the `{}` syntax, we are at three models, now.

This means we need to send feedback to ease the creation of those new queries. Unfortunately I don't expect Grafana to support a new response type (fields) from day one and this means we need to find a way to retrofit fields into logs.

My suggestion is that for any (v1) query we will automatically reconvert fields into log using logfmt format. If there is only one field per entry we will use the field value as log value.

Now this will make all proposed operators work as is in Grafana except for the `| sort` operator.

Since we will need a `v2` anyway for the sort operator to work, I think it also make sense toonly include the new fields result type there too.

### Faceting

As explained in the [parsers section](#logql-parsers), some parsers (`json` and `logfmt`) will support implicit extraction. However when the user will want to reduce fields by selecting them, I think it would be useful to provide an API that returns all field names for a given field stream selector and a time range. This way Grafana or any other integrations will be able to provide auto completion for those fields to select.

> 

Reviewer 10: Very good idea!
